A good family head is a humble family head.
A good overseer.
A humble overseer.
Now one thing that can affect our humility for good or for bad
is how we view our position.
Let's explore that using contrasting examples.
Two men who work very closely together
but who turned out very differently.
The first one is King Saul.
We remember Saul as the man who was very humble
and then he wasn't.
What went wrong?
Could it be that the basis for his humility
was a little off-center to begin with?
You remember the day that he first met Samuel
and he was given some unexpected attention?
What was it that Saul said?
Am I not a Benjaminite of the smallest of the tribes of Israel
and my family the most insignificant of all the families?
His comments show that he felt that he was in a humble position,
insignificant family, small tribe, comparison with others.
What would happen if all of that changed?
It did change and Saul found himself
as the first member of the first family in Israel.
How would he handle that responsibility?
Saul evidently felt that what Israel needed
was a strong leader on the battlefield and off.
And so he developed an authoritarian style.
He did have successes on the battlefield
and he did command respect.
When he discovered that his young personal musician David
was also brilliant soldier, everything was going well.
Until that day, you remember the day that he heard
the women singing David's praises.
Please turn with me to 1 Samuel chapter 18.
And let's look at Saul's reaction.
1 Samuel chapter 18, verse 8, Saul became very angry.
The song displeased him.
He said, they've credited David with tens of thousands.
But to me, they've credited thousands.
The only thing left to give him is the kingship.
It was about the position.
He viewed David as a rival, a threat to his kingship.
Was David a threat to Saul?
Not at all.
David was completely loyal to his king,
even off the battlefield.
David was willing to sit humbly with Saul
and play soothing music for him.
But Saul couldn't shake his suspicious angry thoughts
and they whirled up inside him until the day
that he violently threw a spirit David.
To Saul, all he was doing was protecting a position
that was rightfully his.
But how do you think David felt?
Sometime later, David actually said to Saul
1 Samuel 24-14,
who are you chasing?
A dead dog?
A single flea?
Is David felt very small and unappreciated?
How about Saul's own family?
A few pages on to 1 Samuel 20.
This was an occasion when Jonathan
respectfully defended David.
Saul didn't like this.
And so we read here in 1 Samuel 20 and verse 30.
Saul became enraged with Jonathan and said to him,
Do you think that I do not know that you're choosing to side
with the Son of Jesse to your own shame
and to the shame of your mother?
As long as the Son of Jesse is alive on the earth,
you and your kingship will not be firmly established.
Again, Saul evidently felt he was just defending
his position and the position of his son Jonathan.
But how do you think Jonathan felt?
The account says he left the room angry and humiliated.
And if Saul's dear wife had been there and heard this,
how do you think she would have felt?
His Saul's example was extreme.
But the lesson is clear.
As husbands, as overseers,
we'd never want to become so focused on our position
that we make those under our care feel small or unappreciated.
We're ready for a contrast.
David learned how to treat those under his care from his role model.
Happily, that role model wasn't Saul, it was Jehovah.
And on one occasion, David wrote a special song.
It's recorded twice in the Bible for Samuel 22 and in the 18th Psalm.
The superscription says that David wrote the song when Jehovah
had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies
and out of the hand of Saul.
Unlike Saul, who made David feel small and unappreciated,
how did David's real overseer treat him?
When in Psalm 1835, he said of Jehovah,
your right hand supports me and your humility makes me great.
His Jehovah humbly nurtured David
and built him up so that he could excel.
And David wanted to treat those under his care in exactly the same way.
There were some among David's men
who were excellent on the battlefield.
Their feet rivaled that of their King David.
How would he treat them?
Beniah, for example,
killed a lion, slew a giant very much like his King David.
Did David get jealous?
No, he promoted Beniah.
In fact, he entrusted Beniah with his own life
because he made him the chief of his bodyguard.
So he encouraged and supported his men
so that they could excel.
How about his own family?
Well, remember that by the time that David married Abigail,
he'd already shown that he was willing to listen to her sensible advice.
And his own son Solomon,
David trained him, he supported him, he encouraged him.
Even though Solomon had been given the privilege of building the temple,
that was something that David had thought would be his own crowning achievement.
His humility allowed them to make those under his care greater.
David was also the one who said,
Jehovah is my shepherd.
And so he knew how he had to treat those under his care.
Please follow with me as we read in the 78th Psalm,
something said about David.
Psalm 78, it's right near the end of that long Psalm.
What was it that Jehovah was looking for?
Verse 70,
He chose David his servant,
and took him from the sheep hands,
from tending the nursing use,
and made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people,
and over Israel, his inheritance.
He shepherded them with integrity of heart,
and with skillful hands he led them.
Was David successful as a family head,
and as an overseer of a Jehovah's people?
Yes, he was, because he knew how to be a shepherd.
We know he was successful because much later the prophet Ezekiel,
talking about the coming Messiah,
said, I will raise up one shepherd over them, my servant David,
truly a market of success.
So as family heads, as overseers,
we learn a lot from these contrasting examples.
Unlike Saul, we never want to become so focused on our position
and the respect that we feel is due to us,
that we make others around us feel small and unappreciated.
But like David,
we want to build up, train, encourage,
support those under our care so that they can excel.
We're humble shepherds,
and as such we build not a controlling environment,
but a nurturing one,
so that those under our care can give Jehovah their very best.
When we do that, those under our care will be happy,
and we'll be happy because we're imitating our humble shepherd
and overseer of our souls, Jehovah.